# ICAG GHANA
**Sample Question And Answers**

*Questions*
1. Odwira Ltd operates in the mining industry with a financial year end 31 December, 2020.
  *  On 1 January, 2020, Odwira Ltd began to lease a group of machines that were used in the production process.
  * The lease was for five years, and the total annual rental (payable in arrears) was GH¢8 million.
  * The lessor paid GH¢30 million for the machines on 31 December 2019.
  * The lessor has advised Odwira Ltd that the interest rate implicit in the lease can be taken as 10%.
  * The estimated useful economic life of the machines were five years.

*Required:*

In accordance with IFRS 16: Leases, show the accounting treatment of the above transaction.

The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting identifies faithful representation as a fundamental qualitative characteristic of useful financial information.

*Required:*

Distinguish between fundamental and enhancing qualitative characteristics.		(MAY 2021)

2. BeGreen Ltd (BeGreen) is an agro-processing company which reports under International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs) and prepares its financial statements up to 31 December each year. The company intends to comply fully with IAS 12 Income Taxes by introducing deferred tax in its financial statements. 

- On 1 January 2020, the company acquired an item of plant which cost GH¢750,000 and has a useful life of 5 years with no residual value. 
- BeGreen enjoys capital allowance at the rate of 30%. Revenue generated by using the plant is taxable, any gain on disposal of the
- machine will be taxable and any loss on disposal will be deductible for tax purposes. BeGreen estimates current tax provision for the year to 31 December 2020 at GH¢10,125.
- The tax rate of BeGreen is 25%.

***

*SQL*
```
In addition, a three-year fixed rate GH¢2.4 million loan was borrowed on 1 January 2022 at 6.5%.
A loan set-up fee (transaction costs) of GH¢24,000 was incurred.
This increased the effective interest rate on the loan to 6.88%
```

***

Fugu Ltd (Fugu) operates in the automobile industry.
The following transaction relates to Fugu for the year-end 31 July 2023. 
On August 1, 2022, Fugu entered into a ten-year lease, agreeing to pay GH¢3 million
annually in arrears in exchange for the use of a building. 
The present value of the minimum lease payments was GH¢20.13 million at 
1 August 2022, and the useful economic life of the building was 50 years. Fugu’s cost of capital is 8%.
